


Hunted Down

by Charles Dickens



I.


Most of us see some romances in life.  In my capacity as Chief
Manager of a Life Assurance Office, I think I have within the last
thirty years seen more romances than the generality of men, however
unpromising the opportunity may, at first sight, seem.

As I have retired, and live at my ease, I possess the means that I
used to want, of considering what I have seen, at leisure.  My
experiences have a more remarkable aspect, so reviewed, than they
had when they were in progress.  I have come home from the Play
now, and can recall the scenes of the Drama upon which the curtain
has fallen, free from the glare, bewilderment, and bustle of the
Theatre.

Let me recall one of these Romances of the real world.

There is nothing truer than physiognomy, taken in connection with
manner.  The art of reading that book of which Eternal Wisdom
obliges every human creature to present his or her own page with
the individual character written on it, is a difficult one,
perhaps, and is little studied.  It may require some natural
aptitude, and it must require (for everything does) some patience
and some pains.  That these are not usually given to it, - that
numbers of people accept a few stock commonplace expressions of the
face as the whole list of characteristics, and neither seek nor
know the refinements that are truest, - that You, for instance,
give a great deal of time and attention to the reading of music,
Greek, Latin, French, Italian, Hebrew, if you please, and do not
qualify yourself to read the face of the master or mistress looking
over your shoulder teaching it to you, - I assume to be five
hundred times more probable than improbable.  Perhaps a little
self-sufficiency may be at the bottom of this; facial expression
requires no study from you, you think; it comes by nature to you to
know enough about it, and you are not to be taken in.

I confess, for my part, that I HAVE been taken in, over and over
again.  I have been taken in by acquaintances, and I have been
taken in (of course) by friends; far oftener by friends than by any
other class of persons.  How came I to be so deceived?  Had I quite
misread their faces?

No.  Believe me, my first impression of those people, founded on
face and manner alone, was invariably true.  My mistake was in
suffering them to come nearer to me and explain themselves away.



II.


The partition which separated my own office from our general outer
office in the City was of thick plate-glass.  I could see through
it what passed in the outer office, without hearing a word.  I had
it put up in place of a wall that had been there for years, - ever
since the house was built.  It is no matter whether I did or did
not make the change in order that I might derive my first
impression of strangers, who came to us on business, from their
faces alone, without being influenced by anything they said.
Enough to mention that I turned my glass partition to that account,
and that a Life Assurance Office is at all times exposed to be
practised upon by the most crafty and cruel of the human race.

It was through my glass partition that I first saw the gentleman
whose story I am going to tell.

He had come in without my observing it, and had put his hat and
umbrella on the broad counter, and was bending over it to take some
papers from one of the clerks.  He was about forty or so, dark,
exceedingly well dressed in black, - being in mourning, - and the
hand he extended with a polite air, had a particularly well-fitting
black-kid glove upon it.  His hair, which was elaborately brushed
and oiled, was parted straight up the middle; and he presented this
parting to the clerk, exactly (to my thinking) as if he had said,
in so many words: 'You must take me, if you please, my friend, just
as I show myself.  Come straight up here, follow the gravel path,
keep off the grass, I allow no trespassing.'

I conceived a very great aversion to that man the moment I thus saw
him.

He had asked for some of our printed forms, and the clerk was
giving them to him and explaining them.  An obliged and agreeable
smile was on his face, and his eyes met those of the clerk with a
sprightly look.  (I have known a vast quantity of nonsense talked
about bad men not looking you in the face.  Don't trust that
conventional idea.  Dishonesty will stare honesty out of
countenance, any day in the week, if there is anything to be got by
it.)

I saw, in the corner of his eyelash, that he became aware of my
looking at him.  Immediately he turned the parting in his hair
toward the glass partition, as if he said to me with a sweet smile,
'Straight up here, if you please.  Off the grass!'

In a few moments he had put on his hat and taken up his umbrella,
and was gone.

I beckoned the clerk into my room, and asked, 'Who was that?'

He had the gentleman's card in his hand.  'Mr. Julius Slinkton,
Middle Temple.'

'A barrister, Mr. Adams?'

'I think not, sir.'

'I should have thought him a clergyman, but for his having no
Reverend here,' said I.

'Probably, from his appearance,' Mr. Adams replied, 'he is reading
for orders.'

I should mention that he wore a dainty white cravat, and dainty
linen altogether.

'What did he want, Mr. Adams?'

'Merely a form of proposal, sir, and form of reference.'

'Recommended here?  Did he say?'

'Yes, he said he was recommended here by a friend of yours.  He
noticed you, but said that as he had not the pleasure of your
personal acquaintance he would not trouble you.'

'Did he know my name?'

'O yes, sir!  He said, "There IS Mr. Sampson, I see!"'

'A well-spoken gentleman, apparently?'

'Remarkably so, sir.'

'Insinuating manners, apparently?'

'Very much so, indeed, sir.'

'Hah!' said I.  'I want nothing at present, Mr. Adams.'

Within a fortnight of that day I went to dine with a friend of
mine, a merchant, a man of taste, who buys pictures and books, and
the first man I saw among the company was Mr. Julius Slinkton.
There he was, standing before the fire, with good large eyes and an
open expression of face; but still (I thought) requiring everybody
to come at him by the prepared way he offered, and by no other.

I noticed him ask my friend to introduce him to Mr. Sampson, and my
friend did so.  Mr. Slinkton was very happy to see me.  Not too
happy; there was no over-doing of the matter; happy in a thoroughly
well-bred, perfectly unmeaning way.

'I thought you had met,' our host observed.

'No,' said Mr. Slinkton.  'I did look in at Mr. Sampson's office,
on your recommendation; but I really did not feel justified in
troubling Mr. Sampson himself, on a point in the everyday, routine
of an ordinary clerk.'

I said I should have been glad to show him any attention on our
friend's introduction.

'I am sure of that,' said he, 'and am much obliged.  At another
time, perhaps, I may be less delicate.  Only, however, if I have
real business; for I know, Mr. Sampson, how precious business time
is, and what a vast number of impertinent people there are in the
world.'

I acknowledged his consideration with a slight bow.  'You were
thinking,' said I, 'of effecting a policy on your life.'

'O dear no!  I am afraid I am not so prudent as you pay me the
compliment of supposing me to be, Mr. Sampson.  I merely inquired
for a friend.  But you know what friends are in such matters.
Nothing may ever come of it.  I have the greatest reluctance to
trouble men of business with inquiries for friends, knowing the
probabilities to be a thousand to one that the friends will never
follow them up.  People are so fickle, so selfish, so
inconsiderate.  Don't you, in your business, find them so every
day, Mr. Sampson?'

I was going to give a qualified answer; but he turned his smooth,
white parting on me with its 'Straight up here, if you please!' and
I answered 'Yes.'

'I hear, Mr. Sampson,' he resumed presently, for our friend had a
new cook, and dinner was not so punctual as usual, 'that your
profession has recently suffered a great loss.'

'In money?' said I.

He laughed at my ready association of loss with money, and replied,
'No, in talent and vigour.'

Not at once following out his allusion, I considered for a moment.
'HAS it sustained a loss of that kind?' said I.  'I was not aware
of it.'

'Understand me, Mr. Sampson.  I don't imagine that you have
retired.  It is not so bad as that.  But Mr. Meltham - '

'O, to be sure!' said I.  'Yes!  Mr. Meltham, the young actuary of
the "Inestimable."'

'Just so,' he returned in a consoling way.

'He is a great loss.  He was at once the most profound, the most
original, and the most energetic man I have ever known connected
with Life Assurance.'

I spoke strongly; for I had a high esteem and admiration for
Meltham; and my gentleman had indefinitely conveyed to me some
suspicion that he wanted to sneer at him.  He recalled me to my
guard by presenting that trim pathway up his head, with its
internal 'Not on the grass, if you please - the gravel.'

'You knew him, Mr. Slinkton.'

'Only by reputation.  To have known him as an acquaintance or as a
friend, is an honour I should have sought if he had remained in
society, though I might never have had the good fortune to attain
it, being a man of far inferior mark.  He was scarcely above
thirty, I suppose?'

'About thirty.'

'Ah!' he sighed in his former consoling way.  'What creatures we
are!  To break up, Mr. Sampson, and become incapable of business at
that time of life! - Any reason assigned for the melancholy fact?'

('Humph!' thought I, as I looked at him.  'But I WON'T go up the
track, and I WILL go on the grass.')

'What reason have you heard assigned, Mr. Slinkton?' I asked,
point-blank.

'Most likely a false one.  You know what Rumour is, Mr. Sampson.  I
never repeat what I hear; it is the only way of paring the nails
and shaving the head of Rumour.  But when YOU ask me what reason I
have heard assigned for Mr. Meltham's passing away from among men,
it is another thing.  I am not gratifying idle gossip then.  I was
told, Mr. Sampson, that Mr. Meltham had relinquished all his
avocations and all his prospects, because he was, in fact, broken-
hearted.  A disappointed attachment I heard, - though it hardly
seems probable, in the case of a man so distinguished and so
attractive.'

'Attractions and distinctions are no armour against death,' said I.

'O, she died?  Pray pardon me.  I did not hear that.  That, indeed,
makes it very, very sad.  Poor Mr. Meltham!  She died?  Ah, dear
me!  Lamentable, lamentable!'

I still thought his pity was not quite genuine, and I still
suspected an unaccountable sneer under all this, until he said, as
we were parted, like the other knots of talkers, by the
announcement of dinner:

'Mr. Sampson, you are surprised to see me so moved on behalf of a
man whom I have never known.  I am not so disinterested as you may
suppose.  I have suffered, and recently too, from death myself.  I
have lost one of two charming nieces, who were my constant
companions.  She died young - barely three-and-twenty; and even her
remaining sister is far from strong.  The world is a grave!'

He said this with deep feeling, and I felt reproached for the
coldness of my manner.  Coldness and distrust had been engendered
in me, I knew, by my bad experiences; they were not natural to me;
and I often thought how much I had lost in life, losing
trustfulness, and how little I had gained, gaining hard caution.
This state of mind being habitual to me, I troubled myself more
about this conversation than I might have troubled myself about a
greater matter.  I listened to his talk at dinner, and observed how
readily other men responded to it, and with what a graceful
instinct he adapted his subjects to the knowledge and habits of
those he talked with.  As, in talking with me, he had easily
started the subject I might be supposed to understand best, and to
be the most interested in, so, in talking with others, he guided
himself by the same rule.  The company was of a varied character;
but he was not at fault, that I could discover, with any member of
it.  He knew just as much of each man's pursuit as made him
agreeable to that man in reference to it, and just as little as
made it natural in him to seek modestly for information when the
theme was broached.

As he talked and talked - but really not too much, for the rest of
us seemed to force it upon him - I became quite angry with myself.
I took his face to pieces in my mind, like a watch, and examined it
in detail.  I could not say much against any of his features
separately; I could say even less against them when they were put
together.  'Then is it not monstrous,' I asked myself, 'that
because a man happens to part his hair straight up the middle of
his head, I should permit myself to suspect, and even to detest
him?'

(I may stop to remark that this was no proof of my sense.  An
observer of men who finds himself steadily repelled by some
apparently trifling thing in a stranger is right to give it great
weight.  It may be the clue to the whole mystery.  A hair or two
will show where a lion is hidden.  A very little key will open a
very heavy door.)

I took my part in the conversation with him after a time, and we
got on remarkably well.  In the drawing-room I asked the host how
long he had known Mr. Slinkton.  He answered, not many months; he
had met him at the house of a celebrated painter then present, who
had known him well when he was travelling with his nieces in Italy
for their health.  His plans in life being broken by the death of
one of them, he was reading with the intention of going back to
college as a matter of form, taking his degree, and going into
orders.  I could not but argue with myself that here was the true
explanation of his interest in poor Meltham, and that I had been
almost brutal in my distrust on that simple head.



III.


On the very next day but one I was sitting behind my glass
partition, as before, when he came into the outer office, as
before.  The moment I saw him again without hearing him, I hated
him worse than ever.

It was only for a moment that I had this opportunity; for he waved
his tight-fitting black glove the instant I looked at him, and came
straight in.

'Mr. Sampson, good-day!  I presume, you see, upon your kind
permission to intrude upon you.  I don't keep my word in being
justified by business, for my business here - if I may so abuse the
word - is of the slightest nature.'

I asked, was it anything I could assist him in?

'I thank you, no.  I merely called to inquire outside whether my
dilatory friend had been so false to himself as to be practical and
sensible.  But, of course, he has done nothing.  I gave him your
papers with my own hand, and he was hot upon the intention, but of
course he has done nothing.  Apart from the general human
disinclination to do anything that ought to be done, I dare say
there is a specially about assuring one's life.  You find it like
will-making.  People are so superstitious, and take it for granted
they will die soon afterwards.'

'Up here, if you please; straight up here, Mr. Sampson.  Neither to
the right nor to the left.'  I almost fancied I could hear him
breathe the words as he sat smiling at me, with that intolerable
parting exactly opposite the bridge of my nose.

'There is such a feeling sometimes, no doubt,' I replied; 'but I
don't think it obtains to any great extent.'

'Well,' said he, with a shrug and a smile, 'I wish some good angel
would influence my friend in the right direction.  I rashly
promised his mother and sister in Norfolk to see it done, and he
promised them that he would do it.  But I suppose he never will.'

He spoke for a minute or two on indifferent topics, and went away.

I had scarcely unlocked the drawers of my writing-table next
morning, when he reappeared.  I noticed that he came straight to
the door in the glass partition, and did not pause a single moment
outside.

'Can you spare me two minutes, my dear Mr. Sampson?'

'By all means.'

'Much obliged,' laying his hat and umbrella on the table; 'I came
early, not to interrupt you.  The fact is, I am taken by surprise
in reference to this proposal my friend has made.'

'Has he made one?' said I.

'Ye-es,' he answered, deliberately looking at me; and then a bright
idea seemed to strike him - 'or he only tells me he has.  Perhaps
that may be a new way of evading the matter.  By Jupiter, I never
thought of that!'

Mr. Adams was opening the morning's letters in the outer office.
'What is the name, Mr. Slinkton?' I asked.

'Beckwith.'

I looked out at the door and requested Mr. Adams, if there were a
proposal in that name, to bring it in.  He had already laid it out
of his hand on the counter.  It was easily selected from the rest,
and he gave it me.  Alfred Beckwith.  Proposal to effect a policy
with us for two thousand pounds.  Dated yesterday.

'From the Middle Temple, I see, Mr. Slinkton.'

'Yes.  He lives on the same staircase with me; his door is
opposite.  I never thought he would make me his reference though.'

'It seems natural enough that he should.'

'Quite so, Mr. Sampson; but I never thought of it.  Let me see.'
He took the printed paper from his pocket.  'How am I to answer all
these questions?'

'According to the truth, of course,' said I.

'O, of course!' he answered, looking up from the paper with a
smile; 'I meant they were so many.  But you do right to be
particular.  It stands to reason that you must be particular.  Will
you allow me to use your pen and ink?'

'Certainly.'

'And your desk?'

'Certainly.'

He had been hovering about between his hat and his umbrella for a
place to write on.  He now sat down in my chair, at my blotting-
paper and inkstand, with the long walk up his head in accurate
perspective before me, as I stood with my back to the fire.

Before answering each question he ran over it aloud, and discussed
it.  How long had he known Mr. Alfred Beckwith?  That he had to
calculate by years upon his fingers.  What were his habits?  No
difficulty about them; temperate in the last degree, and took a
little too much exercise, if anything.  All the answers were
satisfactory.  When he had written them all, he looked them over,
and finally signed them in a very pretty hand.  He supposed he had
now done with the business.  I told him he was not likely to be
troubled any farther.  Should he leave the papers there? If he
pleased.  Much obliged.  Good-morning.

I had had one other visitor before him; not at the office, but at
my own house.  That visitor had come to my bedside when it was not
yet daylight, and had been seen by no one else but by my faithful
confidential servant.

A second reference paper (for we required always two) was sent down
into Norfolk, and was duly received back by post.  This, likewise,
was satisfactorily answered in every respect.  Our forms were all
complied with; we accepted the proposal, and the premium for one
year was paid.



IV.


For six or seven months I saw no more of Mr. Slinkton.  He called
once at my house, but I was not at home; and he once asked me to
dine with him in the Temple, but I was engaged.  His friend's
assurance was effected in March.  Late in September or early in
October I was down at Scarborough for a breath of sea-air, where I
met him on the beach.  It was a hot evening; he came toward me with
his hat in his hand; and there was the walk I had felt so strongly
disinclined to take in perfect order again, exactly in front of the
bridge of my nose.

He was not alone, but had a young lady on his arm.

She was dressed in mourning, and I looked at her with great
interest.  She had the appearance of being extremely delicate, and
her face was remarkably pale and melancholy; but she was very
pretty.  He introduced her as his niece, Miss Niner.

'Are you strolling, Mr. Sampson?  Is it possible you can be idle?'

It WAS possible, and I WAS strolling.

'Shall we stroll together?'

'With pleasure.'

The young lady walked between us, and we walked on the cool sea
sand, in the direction of Filey.

'There have been wheels here,' said Mr. Slinkton.  'And now I look
again, the wheels of a hand-carriage!  Margaret, my love, your
shadow without doubt!'

'Miss Niner's shadow?' I repeated, looking down at it on the sand.

'Not that one,' Mr. Slinkton returned, laughing.  'Margaret, my
dear, tell Mr. Sampson.'

'Indeed,' said the young lady, turning to me, 'there is nothing to
tell - except that I constantly see the same invalid old gentleman
at all times, wherever I go.  I have mentioned it to my uncle, and
he calls the gentleman my shadow.'

'Does he live in Scarborough?' I asked.

'He is staying here.'

'Do you live in Scarborough?'

'No, I am staying here.  My uncle has placed me with a family here,
for my health.'

'And your shadow?' said I, smiling.

'My shadow,' she answered, smiling too, 'is - like myself - not
very robust, I fear; for I lose my shadow sometimes, as my shadow
loses me at other times.  We both seem liable to confinement to the
house.  I have not seen my shadow for days and days; but it does
oddly happen, occasionally, that wherever I go, for many days
together, this gentleman goes.  We have come together in the most
unfrequented nooks on this shore.'

'Is this he?' said I, pointing before us.

The wheels had swept down to the water's edge, and described a
great loop on the sand in turning.  Bringing the loop back towards
us, and spinning it out as it came, was a hand-carriage, drawn by a
man.

'Yes,' said Miss Niner, 'this really is my shadow, uncle.'

As the carriage approached us and we approached the carriage, I saw
within it an old man, whose head was sunk on his breast, and who
was enveloped in a variety of wrappers.  He was drawn by a very
quiet but very keen-looking man, with iron-gray hair, who was
slightly lame.  They had passed us, when the carriage stopped, and
the old gentleman within, putting out his arm, called to me by my
name.  I went back, and was absent from Mr. Slinkton and his niece
for about five minutes.

When I rejoined them, Mr. Slinkton was the first to speak.  Indeed,
he said to me in a raised voice before I came up with him:

'It is well you have not been longer, or my niece might have died
of curiosity to know who her shadow is, Mr. Sampson.'

'An old East India Director,' said I.  'An intimate friend of our
friend's, at whose house I first had the pleasure of meeting you.
A certain Major Banks.  You have heard of him?'

'Never.'

'Very rich, Miss Niner; but very old, and very crippled.  An
amiable man, sensible - much interested in you.  He has just been
expatiating on the affection that he has observed to exist between
you and your uncle.'

Mr. Slinkton was holding his hat again, and he passed his hand up
the straight walk, as if he himself went up it serenely, after me.

'Mr. Sampson,' he said, tenderly pressing his niece's arm in his,
'our affection was always a strong one, for we have had but few
near ties.  We have still fewer now.  We have associations to bring
us together, that are not of this world, Margaret.'

'Dear uncle!' murmured the young lady, and turned her face aside to
hide her tears.

'My niece and I have such remembrances and regrets in common, Mr.
Sampson,' he feelingly pursued, 'that it would be strange indeed if
the relations between us were cold or indifferent.  If I remember a
conversation we once had together, you will understand the
reference I make.  Cheer up, dear Margaret.  Don't droop, don't
droop.  My Margaret!  I cannot bear to see you droop!'

The poor young lady was very much affected, but controlled herself.
His feelings, too, were very acute.  In a word, he found himself
under such great need of a restorative, that he presently went
away, to take a bath of sea-water, leaving the young lady and me
sitting by a point of rock, and probably presuming - but that you
will say was a pardonable indulgence in a luxury - that she would
praise him with all her heart.

She did, poor thing!  With all her confiding heart, she praised him
to me, for his care of her dead sister, and for his untiring
devotion in her last illness.  The sister had wasted away very
slowly, and wild and terrible fantasies had come over her toward
the end, but he had never been impatient with her, or at a loss;
had always been gentle, watchful, and self-possessed.  The sister
had known him, as she had known him, to be the best of men, the
kindest of men, and yet a man of such admirable strength of
character, as to be a very tower for the support of their weak
natures while their poor lives endured.

'I shall leave him, Mr. Sampson, very soon,' said the young lady;
'I know my life is drawing to an end; and when I am gone, I hope he
will marry and be happy.  I am sure he has lived single so long,
only for my sake, and for my poor, poor sister's.'

The little hand-carriage had made another great loop on the damp
sand, and was coming back again, gradually spinning out a slim
figure of eight, half a mile long.

'Young lady,' said I, looking around, laying my hand upon her arm,
and speaking in a low voice, 'time presses.  You hear the gentle
murmur of that sea?'

She looked at me with the utmost wonder and alarm, saying, 'Yes!'

'And you know what a voice is in it when the storm comes?'

'Yes!'

'You see how quiet and peaceful it lies before us, and you know
what an awful sight of power without pity it might be, this very
night!'

'Yes!'

'But if you had never heard or seen it, or heard of it in its
cruelty, could you believe that it beats every inanimate thing in
its way to pieces, without mercy, and destroys life without
remorse?'

'You terrify me, sir, by these questions!'

'To save you, young lady, to save you!  For God's sake, collect
your strength and collect your firmness!  If you were here alone,
and hemmed in by the rising tide on the flow to fifty feet above
your head, you could not be in greater danger than the danger you
are now to be saved from.'

The figure on the sand was spun out, and straggled off into a
crooked little jerk that ended at the cliff very near us.

'As I am, before Heaven and the Judge of all mankind, your friend,
and your dead sister's friend, I solemnly entreat you, Miss Niner,
without one moment's loss of time, to come to this gentleman with
me!'

If the little carriage had been less near to us, I doubt if I could
have got her away; but it was so near that we were there before she
had recovered the hurry of being urged from the rock.  I did not
remain there with her two minutes.  Certainly within five, I had
the inexpressible satisfaction of seeing her - from the point we
had sat on, and to which I had returned - half supported and half
carried up some rude steps notched in the cliff, by the figure of
an active man.  With that figure beside her, I knew she was safe
anywhere.

I sat alone on the rock, awaiting Mr. Slinkton's return.  The
twilight was deepening and the shadows were heavy, when he came
round the point, with his hat hanging at his button-hole, smoothing
his wet hair with one of his hands, and picking out the old path
with the other and a pocket-comb.

'My niece not here, Mr. Sampson?' he said, looking about.

'Miss Niner seemed to feel a chill in the air after the sun was
down, and has gone home.'

He looked surprised, as though she were not accustomed to do
anything without him; even to originate so slight a proceeding.

'I persuaded Miss Niner,' I explained.

'Ah!' said he.  'She is easily persuaded - for her good.  Thank
you, Mr. Sampson; she is better within doors.  The bathing-place
was farther than I thought, to say the truth.'

'Miss Niner is very delicate,' I observed.

He shook his head and drew a deep sigh.  'Very, very, very.  You
may recollect my saying so.  The time that has since intervened has
not strengthened her.  The gloomy shadow that fell upon her sister
so early in life seems, in my anxious eyes, to gather over her,
ever darker, ever darker.  Dear Margaret, dear Margaret!  But we
must hope.'

The hand-carriage was spinning away before us at a most indecorous
pace for an invalid vehicle, and was making most irregular curves
upon the sand.  Mr. Slinkton, noticing it after he had put his
handkerchief to his eyes, said;

'If I may judge from appearances, your friend will be upset, Mr.
Sampson.'

'It looks probable, certainly,' said I.

'The servant must be drunk.'

'The servants of old gentlemen will get drunk sometimes,' said I.

'The major draws very light, Mr. Sampson.'

'The major does draw light,' said I.

By this time the carriage, much to my relief, was lost in the
darkness.  We walked on for a little, side by side over the sand,
in silence.  After a short while he said, in a voice still affected
by the emotion that his niece's state of health had awakened in
him,

'Do you stay here long, Mr. Sampson?'

'Why, no.  I am going away to-night.'

'So soon?  But business always holds you in request.  Men like Mr.
Sampson are too important to others, to be spared to their own need
of relaxation and enjoyment.'

'I don't know about that,' said I.  'However, I am going back.'

'To London?'

'To London.'

'I shall be there too, soon after you.'

I knew that as well as he did.  But I did not tell him so.  Any
more than I told him what defensive weapon my righ
