
Title: The Albany Depot
       A Farce

Author: W. D. Howells




THE ALBANY DEPOT

A FARCE

BY

W. D. HOWELLS

NEW YORK

HARPER AND BROTHERS

1892

Copyright, 1891, by HARPER & BROTHERS



(THE ACTION PASSES IN BOSTON)

_MR. AND MRS. EDWARD ROBERTS; THE CHOREWOMAN_

Mrs. Roberts, with many proofs of an afternoon's shopping in her hands
and arms, appears at the door of the ladies' room, opening from the
public hall, and studies the interior with a searching gaze, which
develops a few suburban shoppers scattered over the settees, with
their bags and packages, and two or three old ladies in the
rocking-chairs. The Chorewoman is going about with a Saturday
afternoon pail and mop, and profiting by the disoccupation of the
place in the hour between the departures of two great expresses, to
wipe up the floor. She passes near the door where Mrs. Roberts is
standing, and Mrs. Roberts appeals to her in the anxiety which her
failure to detect the object of her search has awakened: "Oh, I was
just looking for my husband. He was to meet me here at ten minutes
past three; but there don't seem to _be _any gentlemen."

The Chorewoman: "Mem?"

Mrs. Roberts: "I was just looking for my husband. He was to meet me
here at ten minutes past three; but there don't seem to be any
gentlemen. You haven't happened to notice--"

The Chorewoman: "There's a gentleman over there beyant, readin',
that's just come in. He seemed to be lukun' for somebody." She applies
the mop to the floor close to Mrs. Roberts's skirts.

Mrs. Roberts, bending to the right and to the left, and then, by
standing on tiptoe, catching sight of a hat round a pillar: "Then it's
Mr. Roberts, of course. I'll just go right over to him. Thank you ever
so much. Don't disturb yourself!" She picks her way round the area of
damp left by the mop, and approaches the hat from behind. "It _is_
you, Edward! What a horrid idea I had! I was just going to touch your
hat from behind, for fun; but I kept myself from it in time."

Roberts, looking up with a dazed air from the magazine in his hand:
"Why, what would have happened?"

Mrs. Roberts: "Oh, you know it mightn't have been _you_."

Roberts: "But it _was_ I."

Mrs. Roberts: "Yes, I know; and I was perfectly sure of it; you're
always so prompt, and I always wonder at it, such an absent-minded
creature as you are. But you came near spoiling everything by getting
here behind this pillar, and burying yourself in your book that way.
If it hadn't been for my principle of always asking questions, I never
should have found you in the world. But just as I was really beginning
to despair, the Chorewoman came by, and I asked her if she had seen
any gentleman here lately; and she said there was one now, over here,
and I stretched up and saw you. I had such a fright for a moment, not
seeing you; for I left my little plush bag with my purse in it at
Stearns's, and I've got to hurry right back; though I'm afraid they'll
be shut when I get there, Saturday afternoon, this way; but I'm going
to rattle at the front door, and perhaps they'll come--they always
stay, some of them, to put the goods away; and I can tell them I don't
want to buy anything, but I left my bag with my purse in it, and I
guess they'll let me in. I want you to keep these things for me,
Edward; and I'll leave my shopping-bag; I sha'n't want it any more.
Don't lose any of them. Better keep them all in your lap here
together, and then nobody will come and sit on them." She disburdens
herself of her packages and parcels, and arranges them on her
husband's knees, while she goes on talking. "I'm almost ready to drop,
I'm so tired, and I do believe I should let you go up to Stearns's for
me; but you couldn't describe the bag so they would recognize it, let
alone what was in it, and they wouldn't give it to you, even if they
would let you in to inquire: they're much more likely to let a lady in
than a gentleman. But I shall take a coupe, and tell the driver simply
to fly, though there's plenty of time to go to the ends of the earth
and back before our train starts. Only I should like to be here to
receive the Campbells, and keep Willis from buying tickets for Amy and
himself, and us, too, for that matter; he has that vulgar passion--I
don't know where he's picked it up--for wanting to pay everybody's
way; and you'd never think of your Hundred-Trip ticket-book till it
was too late. Do take your book out and hold it in your hand, so
you'll be sure to remember it, as soon as you see Willis. You had
better keep saying over to yourself, 'Willis--Hundred-Trip
Tickets--Willis--Hundred-Trip Tickets;' that's the way _I_ do. Where
_is_ the book? I have to remember everything! _Do_ keep your
ticket-book in your hand, Edward, till Willis comes."

Roberts: "But I want to read, Agnes, and I've got to hold my _Pop.
Sci._ with one hand and keep your traps in my lap with the other. Did
you find a cook?"

Mrs. Roberts, with rapturous admiration of him: "Well, Edward, you
_have_ got a brain! I declare, the cook had utterly gone out of my
mind. Forgetting that plush bag makes me forget everything. I've got
a splendid one--a perfect treasure. She won't do any of the wash, and
we'll have to put that out; and she's been used to having a
kitchen-maid; but she said we were such a small family that she could
shell the pease herself. She's the most respectable-looking old thing
you ever saw; and she's been having ten dollars a week from the last
family she was in; but she'll come the summer with us for six. I was
very fortunate to get her; all the good girls are snapped up for the
sea-side in May, and they won't go into the country for love or money.
It was the greatest chance! She's such a neat, quiet, lady-like
person, and all the better for being Irish and a Catholic: Catholics
_do_ give so much more of a flavor; and I never could associate that
Nova Scotia, sunken-cheeked leanness of Maria's with a cook. This
one's name is--well, I forget what her name is; Bridget, or Norah, or
something like that--and she's a perfect little butter-ball. She's
coming to go out on the same train with us; and she'll get the dinner
to-night; and I sha'n't have the mortification of sitting down to a
pickup meal with Amy Campbell, the first time she has visited us;
she's conceited enough about her house-keeping as it is, I'm sure, and
I wouldn't have her patronizing and pitying me for worlds. The cook
will be here at half-past three precisely; I had to pretend the train
started a little earlier than it does so as to make her punctual; they
_are_ such uncertain things! and I don't suppose I shall be back by
that time, quite, Edward, and so you must receive her. Let me see!"
She glances up at the clock on the wall. "It's just quarter-past now,
and our train goes at ten minutes to four--My goodness! I'll have to
hurry."

The Colored Man who cries the trains, walking half-way into the room
and then out: "Cars ready for Cottage Farms, Longwood, Chestnut Hill,
Brookline, Newton Centre, Newton Highlands, Waban, Riverside, and all
stations between Riverside and Boston. Circuit Line train now ready
on Track No. 3."

Mrs. Roberts, in extreme agitation: "Good gracious, Edward, that's our
train!"

Roberts, jumping to his feet and dropping all her packages: "No, no,
it isn't, my dear! That's the Circuit Line train: didn't you hear?
Ours doesn't go till ten to four, on the Main Line."

Mrs. Roberts: "Oh yes, so it does. How ridiculous! But now I _must_
run away and leave you, or I never shall get back in time. Be sure to
speak to the cook as soon as she comes in, or she'll get discouraged
and go away again; you can't depend on them for an instant; I told her
_you_ would be here to meet her, if I wasn't--I thought I might be
late; and you mustn't let her slip. And if the Campbells happen to get
here before I'm back, don't you give them the least inkling of our
having just engaged a cook. I'm going to smuggle her into the house
without Amy's knowing it; I wouldn't have her know it for the world.
She prides herself on keeping that impudent, spoiled thing of hers,
with her two soups; and she would simply never stop crowing if she
knew I'd had to change cooks in the middle of the summer."

Roberts, picking up and dropping the multitudinous packages, and
finally sitting down with them all in his lap, very red and heated:
"I'll be careful, my dear."

Mrs. Roberts: "How flushed you are, bending over! You're so stout now,
you ought to bend sidewise; it's perfect folly, your trying to bend
_straight_ over; you'll get apoplexy. But now I _must_ run, or I shall
never be back in the world. Don't forget to look out for the cook!"

Roberts, at whom she glances with misgiving as she runs out, holding
the parcels on his knees with both elbows and one hand, and contriving
with the help of his chin to get his magazine open again: "No, no; I
won't, my dear." He loses himself in his reading, while people come
and go restlessly. A gentleman finally drops into the seat beside him,
and contemplates his absorption with friendly amusement.




II


_ROBERTS AND WILLIS CAMPBELL_

Campbell: "Don't mind _me,_ Roberts."

Roberts, looking up: "Heigh? What! Why, Willis! Glad to see you--"

Campbell: "Now that you _do_ see me, yes, I suppose you are. What have
you got there that makes you cut all your friends?" He looks at
Roberts's open page. "Oh! _Popular Science Monthly._ Isn't Agnes a
little afraid of your turning out an agnostic? By-the-way, where _is_
Agnes?"

Roberts: "She left her purse at Stearns's, and she's gone back after
it. Where's Amy?"

Campbell: "Wherever she said she wouldn't be at the moment. I expected
to find her here with you and Agnes. What time did you say your train
started?"

Roberts. "At ten minutes to four. And, by-the-way--I'd almost
forgotten it--I must keep an eye out for the cook Agnes has been
engaging. She was to meet us here before half-past two, and I shall
have to receive her. You mustn't tell Amy; Agnes doesn't want her to
know she's been changing cooks; and I've got to be very vigilant not
to let her give us the slip, or you won't have any dinner to-night."

Campbell: "Is that so? Well, that interests _me._ Were you expecting
to find her in the _Pop. Sci._?"

Roberts: "Oh, I'd only been reading a minute when you came in."

Campbell: "I don't believe you know how long you'd been reading. Very
likely your cook's come and gone."

Roberts, with some alarm: "She couldn't. I'd only just opened the
book."

Campbell: "I dare say you _think_ so. But you'd better cast your eagle
eye over this assemblage now, and see if she isn't here; though
probably she's gone. What sort of looking woman is she?"

Roberts, staring at him in consternation: "Bless my soul! I don't
know! I never saw her!"

Campbell: "Never saw her?"

Roberts: "No; Agnes engaged her at the intelligence-office, and told
her we should meet her here, and she had to go back for her purse, and
left me to explain."

Campbell: "Ha, ha, ha! Ha, ha, ha! How did she expect you to recognize
her?"

Roberts: "I--I don't know, I'm sure. She--she was very anxious I
shouldn't let her get away."

Campbell, laughing: "You poor old fellow! What are you going to do?"

Roberts: "I'm sure I've no idea. Agnes--"

Campbell: "Agnes ought to have a keeper. You know what I've always
thought of _your_ presence of mind, Roberts; but Agnes--I'm really
surprised at Agnes. This is too good! I must tell Amy this. She'll
never get over this. Ah, ha, ha, ha!"

Roberts: "No, no! You mustn't, Willis. Agnes would be very much
provoked with me, if you told Amy she had been engaging a cook. She
expects to smuggle her into the house without Amy's knowing."

Campbell: "And she left you to meet her here, and keep her--a cook
you'd never set eyes on! Ha, ha, ha, ha! Ah, ha, ha, ha! What's her
name?"

Roberts: "Agnes couldn't remember her last name--one never remembers a
cook's last name. Her first name is Norah or Bridget."

Campbell: "Maggie, perhaps; they all sound alike. Ah, ha, ha! Ha, ha,
ha! This improves."

Roberts: "Don't, Willis; you'll attract attention. What--what shall I
do? If Agnes comes back, and finds I've let the cook get away, she'll
be terribly put out."

Campbell: "Perfectly furious, you poor old fellow!--the rage of a
disappointed pigeon! I wouldn't be in your shoes for anything. Oh my!
I wish Amy was here. Did--did--Agnes"--(he struggles with his
laughter, and explodes from time to time between syllables)--"did she
tell you how the woman looked?"

Roberts: "She said she was a very respectable-looking old thing--a
perfect butter-ball. I suppose she was stout."

Campbell: "That covers the ground of a great many cooks. They're apt
to look respectable when they're off duty and they're not in liquor,
and they're apt to be perfect butter-balls. Any other distinctive
traits?"

Roberts, ruefully: "I don't know. She's Irish, and a Catholic."

Campbell: "They're apt to be Irish, and Catholics too. Well, Roberts,
I don't see what you can ask better. All you've got to do is to pick
out a respectable butter-ball of that religion and nationality, and
tell her you're Mrs. Roberts's husband, and you're to keep her from
slipping away till Mrs. Roberts gets here."

Roberts: "Oh, pshaw, now, Willis! What would you do?"

Campbell: "_There's_ a respectable butter-ball over in the corner by
the window there. You'd better go and speak to her. She's got a
gingham bundle, like a cook's, in her lap, and she keeps looking about
in a fidgety way, as if she expected somebody. I guess that's your
woman, Roberts. Better not let her give you the slip. You'll never
hear the last of it from Agnes if you do. And who'll get our dinner
to-night?"

Roberts, looking over at the woman in the corner, with growing
conviction; "She does answer to the description."

Campbell: "Yes, and she looks tired of waiting. If I know anything of
that woman's character, Roberts, she thinks she's been trifled with,
and she's not going to stay to be made a fool of any longer."

Roberts, getting to his feet: "Do you think so? What makes you think
so? Would you go and speak to her?"

Campbell: "I don't know. She seems to be looking this way. Perhaps she
thinks she recognizes _you_, as she never saw you before."

Roberts: "There can't be any harm in asking her? She does seem to be
looking this way."

Campbell: "Pretty blackly, too. I guess she's lost faith in you. It
wouldn't be any use to speak to her now, Roberts."

Roberts: "I don't know. I'm afraid I'd better. I must. How would you
introduce the matter, Willis?"

Campbell: "Oh, I wouldn't undertake to say! I must leave that entirely
to you."

Roberts: "Do you think I'd better go at it boldly, and ask her if
she's the one; or--or--approach it more gradually?"

Campbell: "With a few remarks about the weather, or the last novel, or
a little society gossip? Oh, decidedly."

Roberts: "Oh, come, now, Willis! What would you advise? You must see
it's very embarrassing."

Campbell: "Not the least embarrassing. Simplest thing in the world!"

The Colored Man who calls the Trains, coming and going as before:
"Cars for Newton, Newtonville, West Newton, Auburndale, Riverside,
Wellesley Hills, Wellesley, Natick, and South Framingham. Express to
Newton. Track No. 5."

Campbell: "Ah, she's off! She's going to take the wrong train. She's
gathering her traps together, Roberts!"

Roberts: "I'll go and speak to her." He makes a sudden dash for the
woman in the corner. Campbell takes up his magazine, and watches him
over the top of it, as he stops before the woman, in a confidential
attitude. In a moment she rises, and with a dumb show of offence
gathers up her belongings and marches past Roberts to the door, with
an angry glance backward at him over her shoulder. He returns
crestfallen to Campbell.

Campbell, looking up from his magazine, in affected surprise: "Where's
your cook? You don't mean to say she was the wrong woman?"

Roberts, gloomily: "She wasn't the right one."

Campbell: "How do you know? What did you say to her?"

Roberts: "I asked her if she had an appointment to meet a gentleman
here."

Campbell: "You _did_? And what did she say?"

Roberts: "She said 'No!' very sharply. She seemed to take it in
dudgeon; she fired up."

Campbell: "I should think so. Sounded like an improper advertisement."

Roberts, in great distress: _"Don't_, Willis, for Heaven's sake!"

Campbell: "Why, you must see it had a very clandestine look. How did
you get out of it?"

Roberts: "I didn't. I got into it further. I told her my wife had made
an appointment for me to meet a cook here that she'd engaged--"

Campbell: "You added insult to injury. Go on!"

Roberts: "And that she corresponded somewhat to the description;
and--and--"

Campbell: "Well?"

Roberts: "And she told me she was no more a cook than my wife was; and
she said she'd teach me to be playing my jokes on ladies; and she
grabbed up her things and flew out of the room."

Campbell; "Waddled, _I_ should have said. But this is pretty serious,
Roberts. She may be a relation of John L. Sullivan's. I guess we
better get out of here; or, no, we can't! We've got to wait for Amy
and Agnes."

Roberts: "What--what would you do?"

Campbell: "I don't know. Look here, Roberts: would you mind sitting a
little way off, so as to look as if I didn't belong with you? I don't
want to be involved in this little row of yours unnecessarily."

Roberts: "Oh, come now, Willis! You don't think she'll make any
trouble? I apologized. I said everything I could think of. She _must_
think I was sincere."

Campbell: "In taking her for a cook? I've no doubt she did. But I
don't see how that would help matters. I don't suppose she's gone for
an officer; but I suspect she's looking up the largest Irishman of her
acquaintance, to come back and interview you. I should advise you to
go out and get on some train; I'd willingly wait here for Amy and
Agnes; but you see the real cook might come here, after you went, and
I shouldn't know her from Adam--or Eve. See?"

Roberts, desperately. "I see--Good heavens! Here comes that woman
back; and a man with her. Willis, you must help me out." Roberts gets
falteringly to his feet, and stands in helpless apprehension, while
Mr. and Mrs. McIlheny bear down upon him from the door. Mr. McIlheny,
a small and wiry Irishman, is a little more vivid for the refreshment
he has taken. He is in his best black suit, and the silk hat which he
wears at a threatening slant gives dignified impressiveness to his
figure and carriage. With some dumb-show of inquiry and assurance
between himself and his wife, he plants himself in front of Roberts,
in an attitude equally favorable for offence and defence.




III


_THE McILHENYS, ROBERTS, AND CAMPBELL_

McIlheny: "And are ye the mahn that's after takun' my wife for yer
cuke?"

Mrs. McIlheny, indicating Campbell, absorbed in his magazine: "And
there's the other wan I saw jokun' wid um, and puttun' um up to it."

McIlheny, after a swift glance at Campbell's proportions and
self-possession: "That's what ye're after thinkun', Mary; but I
haven't got annything to do with what ye're after thinkun'. All I
wannt to know is what this mahn meant by preshumin' to speak to a lady
he didn't know, and takun' her for a cuke." To Roberts: "Will ye tell
me that, ye--"

Roberts, in extreme embarrassment: "Yes, yes, certainly; I shall be
very glad to explain, if you'll just step here to the corner. We're
attracting attention where we are--"

McIlheny: "Attintion! Do ye suppose I care for attintion, when it's me
wife that's been insulted?" He follows Roberts up, with Mrs. McIlheny,
as he retires to the corner where she had been sitting, out of the way
of the people coming and going. Campbell, after a moment, closes his
magazine, and joins them.

Roberts: "Insulted? By no manner of means! Nothing was further from my
thoughts. I--I--can explain it all in a moment, my dear sir, if you
will have patience; I can indeed. I have the highest respect for the
lady, and I'm quite incapable of offering her an affront. The fact
is--I hardly know how to begin--"

McIlheny: "Go ahn, sor; or I'll have to do the beginnun' meself,
pretty soon." He shifts himself from one foot to another with a
saltatory briskness.

Roberts: "The fact is, my wife had engaged a cook, up-town, and she
had sent her down here to meet me, and go out with me to our summer
place at Weston."

McIlheny: "An' fwhat has all that rigamarole to do wid your speakin'
to a lady ye'd never been inthrojuced to? Fwhat had yer wife's cuke to
do with Mrs. McIlheny?"

Roberts: "Why, I didn't know the cook by sight, you see. My wife had
engaged her up-town, and appointed her to meet me here, without
reflecting that I had never seen her, and wouldn't know who she was,
when I _did_ see her; she partly expected to be here herself, and so I
didn't reflect, either."

McIlheny, with signs of an amicable interest: "An' she lift ye to mate
a lady ye never had seen before, and expicted ye to know her by
soight?"

Roberts: "Precisely."

McIlheny, smiling: "Well, that's loike a wooman, Mary; ye can't say it
ain't."

Mrs. McIlheny, grinning: "It's loike a mahn, too, Mike, by the same
token."

McIlheny: "Sure it's no bad joke on ye, sor."

Campbell, interposing: "I was having my laugh at him when your good
lady here noticed us. You see, I know his wife--she's my sister--and I
could understand just how she would do such a thing, and--ah, ha, ha,
ha, ha! Ha, ha, ha! I don't think I shall ever get over it."

McIlheny: "Sure it _is_ good! Hu, hu, hu, hu! Mary, it's what ye'd
call a bull, if it was Irish, I'm thinkun'; an' it's no bad bull as it
is, my dear."

Mrs. McIlheny, laughing: "Ye're right there, Mike. It's as fine a bull
as ever there was."

Campbell: "And my friend here insisted on going over and speaking to
the lady, in hopes she could help him out of the difficulty. I suppose
he bungled it; he only wanted to ask her if she'd seen a cook here,
who had an appointment to go out of town with a gentleman. I'd been
joking him about it, and he thought he must do something; and I fancy
he made a mess of it. He was a good deal worked up. Ha, ha, ha! Ah,
ha, ha, ha!" Mr. and Mrs. McIlheny join in his laugh, and finally
Roberts himself.

The Colored Man who calls the Trains, coming and going: "Cars for
Auburndale, Riverside, Pine Grove, and Newton Lower Falls. Express to
Auburndale, Track No. 7."

Mrs. McIlheny: "There's our train. Mike! Come!"

McIlheny: "So 'tis, Mary! Well, I'm hawpy to make yer acquaintance,
gentlemen; and if ye're ever in the City Hahl when the Council is
sittun', and ye'll send in yer names to Mike McIlheny, I'll be pl'ased
to show ye ahl the attintion in me power. Ye must excuse me _now_;
we're jist runnun' out to the Fahls to pass Sunday at a cousin's of
Mrs. McIlheny's." He snakes hands with Roberts and Campbell, and runs
out, followed by his wife.




IV


_ROBERTS AND CAMPBELL_

Campbell: "Distinguished public character. Well, we're out of that,
Roberts. I had to crowd the truth a little for you, but I fetched the
belligerent McIlheny. What are you going in for next?"

Roberts: "I--upon my word, I haven't the least idea. I think I shall
give up trying to identify the cook. Agnes must do it herself when she
comes here."

Campbell: "Oh no! _That_ won't do, old fellow. The cook may come here
and give you the slip before Agnes gets back."

Roberts: "What would you do?"

Campbell: "Well, I don't know; I don't like to advise, exactly; but it
seems to me you've got to keep trying. You've got to keep your eye out
for respectable butter-balls, and not let them slip through your
fingers."

Roberts: "You mean, go up and speak to them? I _couldn't_ do that
again."

Campbell: "Well, of course you didn't make a howling success with Mrs.
McIlheny; but it wasn't a dead-failure either. But you must use a
little more diplomacy--lead up to the subject gently. Don't go and ask
a woman if she's a cook, or had an appointment to meet a gentleman
here. _That_ won't do. I'll tell you! You might introduce the
business by asking if she had happened to see a lady coming in or
going out; and then describe Agnes, and say you had expected to meet
her here. And she'll say she hadn't seen her here, but such a lady had
just engaged her as a cook. And then you'll say you're the lady's
husband, and you're sure she'll be in in a moment. And there you are!
That's the way you ought to have worked it with Mrs. McIlheny. Then it
would have come out all right."

Roberts, pessimistically: "I don't see how it would have made her the
cook."

Campbell: "It couldn't have done that, of course; but it would have
done everything short of that. But we're well enough out of it,
anyway. It was mighty lucky I came in with my little amendment just
when I did. There's all the difference in the world between asking a
lady whether she _is_ a cook and whether she's _seen_ a cook. That
difference just saved the self-respect of the McIlhenys, and saved
your life. It gave the truth a slight twist in the right direction.
You can't be too careful about the truth, Roberts. You can't offer it
to people in the crude state; it's got to be prepared. If you'd
carried it through the way I wanted you to, the night you and old
Bemis garroted each other, you'd have come out perfectly triumphant.
What you want is not the _real_ truth, but the _ideal_ truth; not what
you _did,_ but what you _ought_ to have done. Heigh? Now, you see,
those McIlhenys have gone off with their susceptibilities in perfect
repair, simply because I substituted a _for_ for an _if,_ and made you
inquire _for_ a cook instead of _if_ she was a cook. Perhaps you did
ask for instead of ask if?"

Roberts: "No, no. I asked her if she _was_ a cook."

Campbell: "Well, I'm glad the McIlhenys had too much sense to believe
that. They're happy, anyway. They're enjoying the hobble that you and
Agnes are in, with lofty compassion. They--hello! here's that fellow
coming back again!"

Roberts: "Who? Which? Where?" He starts nervously about, and confronts
Mr. McIlheny bearing down upon him with a countenance of provisional
severity.

McIlheny: "Just wan word more wid you, sor. Mrs. McIlheny has been
thinkun' it oover, and she says you didn't ask her if she was after
_seeun_ a cuke, but whether she was after _beun'_ a cuke? Now, sor,
which wahs ut? Out wfd ut! Don't be thinkun' ye can throw dust in our
eyes because we're Irishmen!" A threatening tone prevails in Mr.
McIlheny's address at the mounting confusion and hesitation in
Roberts. "Come! are ye deef, mahn?"

Roberts, in spite of Campbell's dumb-show inciting him to fiction:
"I--I--if you will kindly step apart here, I can explain. I was very
confused when I spoke to Mrs. McIlheny."

McIlheny, following him and Willis into the corner: "Fwhat made ye
take my wife for a cuke? Did she luke anny more like a cuke than yer
own wife? Her family is the best in County Mayo. Her father kept six
cows, and she never put her hands in wather. And ye come up to her in
a public place like this, where ye're afraid to spake aboove yer own
breath, and ask her if she's after beun' the cuke yer wife's engaged.
Fwhat do ye mane by ut?"

Roberts: "My dear sir, I know--I can understand how it seems
offensive; but I can assure you that I had no intention--no--no--" he
falters, with an imploring glance at Campbell, who takes the word.

Campbell: "Look here, Mr. McIlheny, you can appreciate the feelings of
a gentleman situated as my friend was here. He had to meet a lady whom
he had never seen before, and didn't know by sight; and we
decided--Mrs. McIlheny was so pleasant and kindly looking--that he
should go and ask her if she had seen a lady of the description he was
looking for, and--"

McIlheny: "Yessor! I can appreciate ahl _that._ But fwhy did he ask
her if _she_ was the lady? Fwhy did he ask her if she was a cuke?
That's what I wannt to know!"

Campbell: "Well, now, I'm sure you can understand that. He was
naturally a good deal embarrassed at having to address a strange lady;
his mind was full of his wife's cook, and instead of asking her if
she'd _seen_ a cook, he bungled and he blundered, and asked her--I
suppose--if she _was_ a cook. Can't you see that? how it would
happen?"

McIlheny, with conviction: "Yessor, I can. And I'll feel it an hannor
if you gintlemen will join me in a glass of wine on the carner, across
the way--"

Campbell: "But your train?"

McIlheny: "Oh, domn the thrain! But I'll just stip aboord and tell
Mrs. McIlheny I've met a frind, an' I'll be out by the next thrain,
an' I'll be back wid you in a jiffy." He runs out, and Campbell turns
to Roberts.

Roberts: "Good heavens, Willis! what are we going to do? Surely, we
can't go out and drink with this man?"

Campbell: "I'm afraid we sha'n't have the pleasure. I'm afraid Mrs.
McIlheny is of a suspicious nature; and when Mr. Mac comes back, it'll
be to offer renewed hostility instead of renewed hospitality. I don't
see anything for us but flight, Roberts. Or, _you_ can't fly, you poor
old fellow! You've got to stay and look out for that cook. I'd be glad
to stay for you, but, you see, I should not know her."

Roberts: "I don't know her either, Willis. I was just thinking whether
you couldn't manage this wretched man rather better alone. I--I'm
afraid I confuse you; and he gets thin
gs out of me--admissions, yo
