


THE SISTERS' TRAGEDY

A. D. 1670

AGLAE, a widow
MURIEL, her unmarried sister.

IT happened once, in that brave land that lies
For half the twelvemonth wrapt in sombre skies,
Two sisters loved one man.  He being dead,
Grief loosed the lips of her he had not wed,
And all the passion that through heavy years
Had masked in smiles unmasked itself in tears.
No purer love may mortals know than this,
The hidden love that guards another's bliss.
High in a turret's westward-facing room,
Whose painted window held the sunset's bloom,
The two together grieving, each to each
Unveiled her soul with sobs and broken speech.

Both still were young, in life's rich summer yet;
And one was dark, with tints of violet
In hair and eyes, and one was blond as she
Who rose--a second daybreak--from the sea,
Gold-tressed and azure-eyed.  In that lone place,
Like dusk and dawn, they sat there face to face.

She spoke the first whose strangely silvering hair
No wreath had worn, nor widow's weed might wear,
And told her blameless love, and knew no shame--
Her holy love that, like a vestal flame
Beside the sacred body of some queen
Within a guarded crypt had burned unseen
From weary year to year.  And she who heard
Smiled proudly through her tears and said no word,
But, drawing closer, on the troubled brow
Laid one long kiss, and that was words enow!


MURIEL.

Be still, my heart!  Grown patient with thine ache,
Thou shouldst be dumb, yet needs must speak, or break.
The world is empty now that he is gone.


AGLAE.

Ay, sweetheart!


MURIEL.

                None was like him, no, not one.
From other men he stood apart, alone
In honor spotless as unfallen snow.
Nothing all evil was it his to know;
His charity still found some germ, some spark
Of light in natures that seemed wholly dark.
He read men's souls; the lowly and the high
Moved on the self-same level in his eye.
Gracious to all, to none subservient,
Without offence he spake the word he meant--
His word no trick of tact or courtly art,
But the white flowering of the noble heart.
Careless he was of much the world counts gain,
Careless of self, too simple to be vain,
Yet strung so finely that for conscience-sake
He would have gone like Cranmer to the stake.
I saw--how could I help but love?  And you--


AGLAE.

At this perfection did I worship too . . .
'Twas this that stabbed me.  Heed not what I say!
I meant it not, my wits are gone astray,
With all that is and has been.  No, I lie--
Had he been less perfection, happier I!


MURIEL.

Strange words and wild!  'Tis the distracted mind
Breathes them, not you, and I no meaning find.


AGLAE.

Yet 'twere as plain as writing on a scroll
Had you but eyes to read within my soul.--
How a grief hidden feeds on its own mood,
Poisons the healthful currents of the blood
With bitterness, and turns the heart to stone!
I think, in truth, 'twere better to make moan,
And so be done with it.  This many a year,
Sweetheart, have I laughed lightly and made cheer,
Pierced through with sorrow!

                              Then the widowed one
With sorrowfullest eyes beneath the sun,
Faltered, irresolute, and bending low
Her head, half whispered,

                          Dear, how could you know?
What masks are faces!--yours, unread by me
These seven long summers; mine, so placidly
Shielding my woe!  No tremble of the lip,
No cheek's quick pallor let our secret slip!
Mere players we, and she that played the queen,
Now in her homespun, looks how poor and mean!
How shall I say it, how find words to tell
What thing it was for me made earth a hell
That else had been my heaven!  'Twould blanch your cheek
Were I to speak it.  Nay, but I will speak,
Since like two souls at compt we seem to stand,
Where nothing may be hidden.  Hold my hand,
But look not at me!  Noble 'twas, and meet,
To hide your heart, nor fling it at his feet
To lie despised there.  Thus saved you our pride
And that white honor for which earls have died.
You were not all unhappy, loving so!
I with a difference wore my weight of woe.
My lord was he.  It was my cruel lot,
My hell, to love him--for he loved me not!

Then came a silence.  Suddenly like death
The truth flashed on them, and each held her breath--
A flash of light whereby they both were slain,
She that was loved and she that loved in vain!




THE LAST CAESAR

1851-1870

I

Now there was one who came in later days
To play at Emperor: in the dead of night
Stole crown and sceptre, and stood forth to light
In sudden purple.  The dawn's straggling rays
Showed Paris fettered, murmuring in amaze,
With red hands at her throat--a piteous sight.
Then the new Caesar, stricken with affright
At his own daring, shrunk from public gaze

In the Elysee, and had lost the day
But that around him flocked his birds of prey,
Sharp-beaked, voracious, hungry for the deed.
'Twixt hope and fear behold great Caesar hang!
Meanwhile, methinks, a ghostly laughter rang
Through the rotunda of the Invalides.

II

What if the boulevards, at set of sun,
Reddened, but not with sunset's kindly glow?
What if from quai and square the murmured woe
Swept heavenward, pleadingly?  The prize was won,
A kingling made and Liberty undone.
No Emperor, this, like him awhile ago,
But his Name's shadow; that one struck the blow
Himself, and sighted the street-sweeping gun!

This was a man of tortuous heart and brain,
So warped he knew not his own point of view--
The master of a dark, mysterious smile.

And there he plotted, by the storied Seine
And in the fairy gardens of St. Cloud,
The Sphinx that puzzled Europe, for awhile.



III

I see him as men saw him once--a face
Of true Napoleon pallor; round the eyes
The wrinkled care; mustache spread pinion-wise,
Pointing his smile with odd sardonic grace
As wearily he turns him in his place,
And bends before the hoarse Parisian cries--
Then vanishes, with glitter of gold-lace
And trumpets blaring to the patient skies.

Not thus he vanished later!  On his path
The Furies waited for the hour and man,
Foreknowing that they waited not in vain.

Then fell the day, O day of dreadful wrath!
Bow down in shame, O crimson-girt Sedan!
Weep, fair Alsace! weep, loveliest Lorraine!

So mused I, sitting underneath the trees
In that old garden of the Tuileries,
Watching the dust of twilight sifting down
Through chestnut boughs just toucht with autumn's brown--
Not twilight yet, but that illusive bloom
Which holds before the deep-etched shadows come;
For still the garden stood in golden mist,
Still, like a river of molten amethyst,
The Seine slipt through its spans of fretted stone,
And, near the grille that once fenced in a throne,
The fountains still unbraided to the day
The unsubstantial silver of their spray.

A spot to dream in, love in, waste one's hours!
Temples and palaces, and gilded towers,
And fairy terraces!--and yet, and yet
Here in her woe came Marie Antoinette,
Came sweet Corday, Du Barry with shrill cry,
Not learning from her betters how to die!
Here, while the Nations watched with bated breath,
Was held the saturnalia of Red Death!
For where that slim Egyptian shaft uplifts
Its point to catch the dawn's and sunset's drifts
Of various gold, the busy Headsman stood. . . .
Place de la Concorde--no, the Place of Blood!

And all so peaceful now!  One cannot bring
Imagination to accept the thing.
Lies, all of it! some dreamer's wild romance--
High-hearted, witty, laughter-loving France!
In whose brain was it that the legend grew
Of Maenads shrieking in this avenue,
Of watch-fires burning, Famine standing guard,
Of long-speared Uhlans in that palace-yard!
What ruder sound this soft air ever smote
Than a bird's twitter or a bugle's note?
What darker crimson ever splashed these walks
Than that of rose-leaves dropping from the stalks?
And yet--what means that charred and broken wall,
That sculptured marble, splintered, like to fall,
Looming among the trees there? . . .  And you say
This happened, as it were, but yesterday?
And here the Commune stretched a barricade,
And there the final desperate stand was made?
Such things have been?  How all things change and fade!
How little lasts in this brave world below!
Love dies; hate cools; the Caesars come and go;
Gaunt Hunter fattens, and the weak grow strong.
Even Republics are not here for long!

Ah, who can tell what hour may bring the doom,
The lighted torch, the tocsin's heavy boom!




IN WESTMINSTER ABBEY

"The Southern Transept,
hardly known by any other name but Poet's Corner."

  DEAN STANLEY.

TREAD softly here; the sacredest of tombs
Are those that hold your Poets.  Kings and queens
Are facile accidents of Time and Chance.
Chance sets them on the heights, they climb not there!
But he who from the darkling mass of men
Is on the wing of heavenly thought upborne
To finer ether, and becomes a voice
For all the voiceless, God anointed him:
His name shall be a star, his grave a shrine.

Tread softly here, in silent reverence tread.
Beneath those marble cenotaphs and urns
Lies richer dust than ever nature hid
Packed in the mountain's adamantine heart,
Or slyly wrapt in unsuspected sand--
The dross men toil for, and oft stain the soul.
How vain and all ignoble seems that greed
To him who stands in this dim claustral air
With these most sacred ashes at his feet!
This dust was Chaucer, Spenser, Dryden this--
The spark that once illumed it lingers still.
O ever-hallowed spot of English earth!
If the unleashed and happy spirit of man
Have option to revisit our dull globe,
What august Shades at midnight here convene
In the miraculous sessions of the moon,
When the great pulse of London faintly throbs,
And one by one the stars in heaven pale!




ALEC YEATON'S SON

GLOUCESTER, AUGUST, 1720

The wind it wailed, the wind it moaned,
   And the white caps flecked the sea;
"An' I would to God," the skipper groaned,
   "I had not my boy with me!"

Snug in the stern-sheets, little John
   Laughed as the scud swept by;
But the skipper's sunburnt cheek grew wan
   As he watched the wicked sky.

"Would he were at his mother's side!"
   And the skipper's eyes were dim.
"Good Lord in heaven, if ill betide,
   What would become of him!

"For me--my muscles are as steel,
   For me let hap what may;
I might make shift upon the keel
   Until the break o' day.

"But he, he is so weak and small,
   So young, scarce learned to stand--
O pitying Father of us all,
   I trust him in Thy hand!

"For Thou, who markest from on high
   A sparrow's fall--each one!--
Surely, O Lord, thou'lt have an eye
   On Alec Yeaton's son!"

Then, helm hard-port; right straight he sailed
   Towards the headland light:
The wind it moaned, the wind it wailed,
   And black, black fell the night.

Then burst a storm to make one quail
   Though housed from winds and waves--
They who could tell about that gale
   Must rise from watery graves!

Sudden it came, as sudden went;
   Ere half the night was sped,
The winds were hushed, the waves were spent,
   And the stars shone overhead.

Now, as the morning mist grew thin,
   The folk on Gloucester shore
Saw a little figure floating in
   Secure, on a broken oar!

Up rose the cry, "A wreck! a wreck!
   Pull, mates, and waste no breath!"--
They knew it, though 'twas but a speck
   Upon the edge of death!

Long did they marvel in the town
   At God his strange decree,
That let the stalwart skipper drown
   And the little child go free!




AT THE FUNERAL OF A MINOR POET

[One of the Bearers soliloquizes:]

. . . Room in your heart for him, O Mother Earth,
Who loved each flower and leaf that made you fair,
And sang your praise in verses manifold
And delicate, with here and there a line
From end to end in blossom like a bough
The May breathes on, so rich it was.  Some thought
The workmanship more costly than the thing
Moulded or carved, as in those ornaments
Found at Mycaene.  And yet Nature's self
Works in this wise; upon a blade of grass,
Or what small note she lends the woodland thrush,
Lavishing endless patience.  He was born
Artist, not artisan, which some few saw
And many dreamed not.  As he wrote no odes
When Croesus wedded or Maecenas died,
And gave no breath to civic feasts and shows,
He missed the glare that gilds more facile men--
A twilight poet, groping quite alone,
Belated, in a sphere where every nest
Is emptied of its music and its wings.
Not great his gift; yet we can poorly spare
Even his slight perfection in an age
Of limping triolets and tame rondeaux.
He had at least ideals, though unreached,
And heard, far off, immortal harmonies,
Such as fall coldly on our ear to-day.
The mighty Zolaistic Movement now
Engrosses us--a miasmatic breath
Blown from the slums.  We paint life as it is,
The hideous side of it, with careful pains,
Making a god of the dull Commonplace.
For have we not the old gods overthrown
And set up strangest idols?  We could clip
Imagination's wing and kill delight,
Our sole art being to leave nothing out
That renders art offensive.  Not for us
Madonnas leaning from their starry thrones
Ineffable, nor any heaven-wrought dream
Of sculptor or of poet; we prefer
Such nightmare visions as in morbid brains
Take shape and substance, thoughts that taint the air
And make all life unlovely.  Will it last?
Beauty alone endures from age to age,
From age to age endures, handmaid of God.
Poets who walk with her on earth go hence
Bearing a talisman.  You bury one,
With his hushed music, in some Potter's Field;
The snows and rains blot out his very name,
As he from life seems blotted: through Time's glass
Slip the invisible and magic sands
That mark the century, then falls a day
The world is suddenly conscious of a flower,
Imperishable, ever to be prized,
Sprung from the mould of a forgotten grave.
'Tis said the seeds wrapt up among the balms
And hieroglyphics of Egyptian kings
Hold strange vitality, and, planted, grow
After the lapse of thrice a thousand years.
Some day, perchance, some unregarded note
Of our poor friend here--some sweet minor chord
That failed to lure our more accustomed ear--
May witch the fancy of an unborn age.
Who knows, since seeds have such tenacity?
Meanwhile he's dead, with scantiest laurel won
And little of our Nineteenth Century gold.
So, take him, Earth, and this his mortal part,
With that shrewd alchemy thou hast, transmute
To flower and leaf in thine unending Springs!




BATUSCHKA.<1>

From yonder gilded minaret
Beside the steel-blue Neva set,
I faintly catch, from time to time,
The sweet, aerial midnight chime--
     "God save the Tsar!"

Above the ravelins and the moats
Of the white citadel it floats;
And men in dungeons far beneath
Listen, and pray, and gnash their teeth--
     "God save the Tsar!"

The soft reiterations sweep
Across the horror of their sleep,

     <1> "Little Father," or "Dear Little Father,"
a term of endearment applied
to the Tsar in Russian folk-song.
As if some daemon in his glee
Were mocking at their misery--
     "God save the Tsar!"

In his Red Palace over there,
Wakeful, he needs must hear the prayer.
How can it drown the broken cries
Wrung from his children's agonies?--
     "God save the Tsar!"

Father they called him from of old--
Batuschka! . . .  How his heart is cold!
Wait till a million scourged men
Rise in their awful might, and then--
     God save the Tsar!




ACT V

[Midnight.]

First, two white arms that held him very close,
And ever closer as he drew him back
Reluctantly, the loose gold-colored hair
A thousand delicate fibres reaching out
Still to detain him; then some twenty steps
Of iron staircase winding round and down,
And ending in a narrow gallery hung
With Gobelin tapestries--Andromeda
Rescued by Perseus, and the sleek Diana
With her nymphs bathing; at the farther end
A door that gave upon a starlit grove
Of citron and clipt palm-trees; then a path
As bleached as moonlight, with the shadow of leaves
Stamped black upon it; next a vine-clad length
Of solid masonry; and last of all
A Gothic archway packed with night, and then--
A sudden gleaming dagger through his heart.




TENNYSON

I

Shakespeare and Milton--what third blazoned name
   Shall lips of after-ages link to these?
   His who, beside the wild encircling seas,
Was England's voice, her voice with one acclaim,
For threescore years; whose word of praise was fame,
   Whose scorn gave pause to man's iniquities.


II

What strain was his in that Crimean war?
   A bugle-call in battle; a low breath,
   Plaintive and sweet, above the fields of death!
So year by year the music rolled afar,
From Euxine wastes to flowery Kandahar,
   Bearing the laurel or the cypress wreath.


III

Others shall have their little space of time,
   Their proper niche and bust, then fade away
   Into the darkness, poets of a day;
But thou, O builder of enduring rhyme,
Thou shalt not pass!  Thy fame in every clime
   On earth shall live where Saxon speech has sway.


IV

Waft me this verse across the winter sea,
   Through light and dark, through mist and blinding sleet,
   O winter winds, and lay it at his feet;
Though the poor gift betray my poverty,
At his feet lay it: it may chance that he
   Will find no gift, where reverence is, unmeet.




THE SHIPMAN'S TALE

Listen, my masters!  I speak naught but truth.
From dawn to dawn they drifted on and on,
Not knowing whither nor to what dark end.
Now the North froze them, now the hot South scorched.
Some called to God, and found great comfort so;
Some gnashed their teeth with curses, and some laughed
An empty laughter, seeing they yet lived,
So sweet was breath between their foolish lips.
Day after day the same relentless sun,
Night after night the same unpitying stars.
At intervals fierce lightnings tore the clouds,
Showing vast hollow spaces, and the sleet
Hissed, and the torrents of the sky were loosed.
From time to time a hand relaxed its grip,
And some pale wretch slid down into the dark
With stifled moan, and transient horror seized
The rest who waited, knowing what must be.
At every turn strange shapes reached up and clutched
The whirling wreck, held on awhile, and then
Slipt back into that blackness whence they came.
Ah, hapless folk, to be so tost and torn,
So racked by hunger, fever, fire, and wave,
And swept at last into the nameless void--
Frail girls, strong men, and mothers with their babes!

And was none saved?

                     My masters, not a soul!

O shipman, woful, woful is thy tale!
Our hearts are heavy and our eyes are dimmed.
What ship is this that suffered such ill fate?

What ship, my masters?  Know ye not?--The World!




"I VEX ME NOT WITH BROODING ON THE YEARS"

I vex me not with brooding on the years
   That were ere I drew breath: why should I then
   Distrust the darkness that may fall again
   When life is done?  Perchance in other spheres--
Dead planets--I once tasted mortal tears,
   And walked as now among a throng of men,
   Pondering things that lay beyond my ken,
   Questioning death, and solacing my fears.
Ofttimes indeed strange sense have I of this,
   Vague memories that hold me with a spell,
   Touches of unseen lips upon my brow,
Breathing some incommunicable bliss!
   In years foregone, O Soul, was all not well?
   Still lovelier life awaits thee.  Fear not thou!




MONODY ON THE DEATH OF WENDELL PHILLIPS

I

One by one they go
Into the unknown dark--
Star-lit brows of the brave,
Voices that drew men's souls.
Rich is the land, O Death!
Can give you dead like our dead!--
Such as he from whose hand
The magic web of romance
Slipt, and the art was lost!
Such as he who erewhile--
The last of the Titan brood--
With his thunder the Senate shook;
Or he who, beside the Charles,
Untoucht of envy or hate,
Tranced the world with his song;
Or that other, that gray-eyed seer
Who in pastoral Concord ways
With Plato and Hafiz walked.


II

Not of these was the man
Whose wraith, through the mists of night,
Through the shuddering wintry stars,
Has passed to eternal morn.
Fit were the moan of the sea
And the clashing of cloud on cloud
For the passing of that soul!

Ever he faced the storm!
No weaver of rare romance,
No patient framer of laws,
No maker of wondrous rhyme,
No bookman wrapt in his dream.
His was the voice that rang
In the fight like a bugle-call,
And yet could be tender and low
As when, on a night in June,
The hushed wind sobs in the pines.
His was the eye that flashed
With a sabre's azure gleam,
Pointing to heights unwon!


III

Not for him were these days
Of clerkly and sluggish calm--
To the petrel the swooping gale!
Austere he seemed, but the hearts
Of all men beat in his breast;
No fetter but galled his wrist,
No wrong that was not his own.
What if those eloquent lips
Curled with the old-time scorn?
What if in needless hours
His quick hand closed on the hilt?
'Twas the smoke from the well-won fields
That clouded the veteran's eyes.
A fighter this to the end!

Ah, if in coming times
Some giant evil arise,
And Honor falter and pale,
His were a name to conjure with!
God send his like again!






INTERLUDES






ECHO-SONG

I

Who can say where Echo dwells?
   In some mountain-cave, methinks,
   Where the white owl sits and blinks;
Or in deep sequestered dells,
Where the foxglove hangs its bells,
               Echo dwells.
                    Echo!
                         Echo!


II

Phantom of the crystal Air,
   Daughter of sweet Mystery!
   Here is one has need of thee;
Lead him to thy secret lair,
Myrtle brings he for thy hair--
               Hear his prayer,
                    Echo!
                         Echo!


III

Echo, lift thy drowsy head,
   And repeat each charmed word
   Thou must needs have overheard
Yestere'en ere, rosy-red,
Daphne down the valley fled--
               Words unsaid,
                    Echo!
                         Echo!


IV

Breathe the vows she since denies!
   She hath broken every vow;
   What she would she would not now--
Thou didst hear her perjuries.
Whisper, whilst I shut my eyes,
               Those sweet lies,
                    Echo!
                         Echo!




A MOOD

A blight, a gloom, I know not what, has crept upon my gladness--
Some vague, remote ancestral touch of sorrow, or of madness;
A fear that is not fear, a pain that has not pain's insistence;
A sense of longing, or of loss, in some foregone existence;
A subtle hurt that never pen has writ nor tongue has spoken--
Such hurt perchance as Nature feels when a blossomed bough is broken.




GUILIELMUS REX

The folk who lived in Shakespeare's day
And saw that gentle figure pass
By London Bridge, his frequent way--
They little knew what man he was.

The pointed beard, the courteous mien,
The equal port to high and low,
All this they saw or might have seen--
But not the light behind the brow!

The doublet's modest gray or brown,
The slender sword-hilt's plain device,
What sign had these for prince or clown?
Few turned, or none, to scan him twice.

Yet 'twas the king of England's kings!
The rest with all their pomps and trains
Are mouldered, half-remembered things--
'Tis he alone that lives and reigns!




"PILLARED ARCH AND SCULPTURED TOWER"

Pillared arch and sculptured tower
Of Ilium have had their hour;
The dust of many a king is blown
On the winds from zone to zone;
Many a warrior sleeps unknown.
Time and Death hold each in thrall,
Yet is Love the lord of all;
Still does Helen's beauty stir
Because a poet sang of her!




THRENODY

I

Upon your hearse this flower I lay.
Brief be your sleep!  You shall be known
When lesser men have had their day:
Fame blossoms where true seed is sown,
Or soon or late, let Time wrong what it may.


II

Unvext by any dream of fame,
You smiled, and bade the world pass by:
But I--I turned, and saw a name
Shaping itself against the sky--
White star that rose amid the battle's flame!


III

Brief be your sleep, for I would see
Your laurels--ah, how trivial now
To him must earthly laurel be
Who wears the amaranth on his brow!
How vain the voices of mortality!




SESTET

SENT TO A FRIEND WITH A VOLUME OF TENNYSON

Wouldst know the clash of knightly steel on steel?
Or list the throstle singing loud and clear?
Or walk at twilight by some haunted mere
In Surrey; or in throbbing London feel
Life's pulse at highest--hark, the minster's peal! . . .
Turn but the page, that various world is here!




A TOUCH OF NATURE

When first the crocus thrusts its point of gold
Up through the still snow-drifted garden mould,
And folded green things in dim woods unclose
Their crinkled spears, a sudden tremor goes
Into my veins and makes me kith and kin
To every wild-born thing that thrills and blows.
Sitting beside this crumbling sea-coal fire,
Here in the city's ceaseless roar and din,
Far from the brambly paths I used to know,
Far from the rustling brooks that slip and shine
Where the Neponset alders take their glow,
I share the tremulous sense of bud and briar
And inarticulate ardors of the vine.




MEMORY

My mind lets go a thousand things,
Like dates of wars and deaths of kings,
And yet recalls the very hour--
'Twas noon by yonder village tower,
And on the last blue noon in May--
The wind came briskly up this way,
Crisping the brook beside the road;
Then, pausing here, set down its load
Of pine-scents, and shook listlessly
Two petals from that wild-rose tree.




"I'LL NOT CONFER WITH SORROW"

I'll not confer with Sorrow
   Till to-morrow;
But Joy shall have her way
   This very day.

Ho, eglantine and cresses
   For her tresses!--
Let Care, the beggar, wait
   Outside the gate.

Tears if you will--but after
   Mirth and laughter;
Then, folded hands on breast
   And endless rest.




A DEDICATION

Take these rhymes into thy grace,
   Since they are of thy begetting,
Lady, that dost make each place
   Where thou art a jewel's setting.

Some such glamour lend this Book:
   Let it be thy poet's wages
That henceforth thy gracious look
   Lies reflected on its pages.




NO SONGS IN WINTER

The sky is gray as gray may be,
There is no bird upon the bough,
There is no leaf on vine or tree.

In the Neponset marshes now
Willow-stems, rosy in the wind,
Shiver with hidden sense of snow.

So too 'tis winter in my mind,
No light-winged fancy comes and stays:
A season churlish and unkind.

Slow creep the hours, slow creep the days,
The black ink crusts upon the pen--
Just wait till bluebirds, wrens, and jays
And golden orioles come again!




"LIKE CRUSOE, WALKING BY THE LONELY STRAND"

Like Crusoe, walking by the lonely strand
And seeing a human footprint on the sand,
Have I this day been startled, finding here,
Set in brown mould and delicately clear,
Spring's footprint--the first crocus of the year!
O sweet invasion!  Farewell solitude!
Soon shall wild creatures of the field and wood
Flock from all sides with much ado and stir,
And make of me most willing prisoner!




THE LETTER

EDWARD ROWLAND SILL, DIED FEBRUARY 27, 1887

I held his letter in my hand,
   And even while I read
The lightning flashed across the land
   The word that he was dead.

How strange it seemed!  His living voice
   Was speaking from the page
Those courteous phrases, tersely choice,
   Light-hearted, witty, sage.

I wondered what it was that died!
   The man himself was here,
His modesty, his scholar's pride,
   His soul serene and clear.

These neither death nor time shall dim,
   Still this sad thing must be--
Henceforth I may not speak to him,
   Though he can speak to me!




SARGENT'S PORTRAIT OF EDWIN BOOTH AT "THE PLAYERS"

That face which no man ever saw
And from his memory banished quite,
With eyes in which are Hamlet's awe
And Cardinal Richelieu's subtle light,
Looks from this frame.  A master's hand
Has set the master-player here,
In the fair temple that he planned
Not for himself.  To us most dear
This image of him!  "It was thus
He looked; such pallor touched his cheek;
With that same grace he greeted us--
Nay, 'tis the man, could it but speak!"
Sad words that shall be said some day--
Far fall the day!  O cruel Time,
Whose breath sweeps mortal things away,
Spare long this image of his prime,
That others standing in the place
Where, save as ghosts, we come no more,
May know what sweet majestic face
The gentle Prince of Players wore!






PAULINE PAVLOVNA

SCENE: St. Petersburg.  Period: the present time.  A ballroom in the
     winter palace of the Prince--.  The ladies in character costumes and
     masks.  The gentlemen in official dress and unmasked, with the
     exception of six tall figures in scarlet kaftans, who are treated with
     marked distinction as they move here and there among the
     promenaders.  Quadrille music throughout the dialogue.
Count SERGIUS PAVLOVICH PANSHINE, who has just
     arrived, is standing anxiously in the doorway of an antechamber
     with his eyes fixed upon a lady in the costume of a maid of honor
     in the time of Catherine II.  The lady presently disengages herself
     from the crowd, and passes near Count PANSHINE, who
     impulsively takes her by the hand and leads her across the threshold
     of the inner apartment, which is unoccupied.

HE.

Pauline!


SHE.

     You knew me?


HE.

                    How could I have failed?
A mask may hide your features, not your soul.
There is an air about you like the air
That folds a star.  A blind man knows the night,
And feels the constellations.  No coarse sense
Of eye or ear had made you plain to me.
Through these I had not found you; for your eyes,
As blue as violets of our Novgorod,
Look black behind your mask there, and your voice--
I had not known that either.  My heart said,
"Pauline Pavlovna."


SHE.

                     Ah!  Your heart said that?
You trust your heart, then!  'Tis a serious risk!--
How is it you and others wear no mask?


HE.

The Emperor's orders.


SHE.

                      Is the Emperor here?
I have not seen him.


HE.

                      He is one of the six
In scarlet kaftans and all masked alike.
Watch--you will note how every one bows down
Before those figures, thinking each by chance
May be the Tsar; yet none knows which is he.
Even his counterparts are 
